OpenTelemetry PHP Auto-Instrumentation blog post (#2506)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2023/php-auto-instrumentation/index.md

---
title: Opentelemetry PHP Auto-Instrumentation
linkTitle: PHP Auto-Instrumentation
date: 2023-03-15
author: '[Przemek Delewski](https://github.com/pdelewski/) (Sumo Logic)'
---

## Introduction

Automatic Instrumentation is a process of adding tracing capabilities into user
application without modyfing it's source code. There are several techniques to
do that, but all of them more or less work in the same way by injecting
additional code into original one during compile time, link time, run-time or by

> extending os in case of ebpf. This blogpost presents method used by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extending the operating system in case of ebpf. This blogpost presents method used by
```

Reviewer: I don't know what `ebpf` is, maybe it needs a link to a definition?

Opentelemetry PHP auto-instrumentation.

## Preconditions

Due to technique chosen by community for auto-instrumentation purposes, there

> are few preconditions that must be fulfilled before user can use it in his

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are a few preconditions that must be fulfilled before user can use it in their
```

application. PHP auto-instrumentation is based on observability API that was
introduced in PHP 8.0. This means that user has to have at least PHP 8

> installed. Another important component is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installed. Another important component is the
```

[composer](https://getcomposer.org/download/) package manager in most recent
version. Third, is availability of c compiler in order to build
[c extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)
which is core component used for injecting tracing code.

> ## Little background

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Background
```

> Observability API allows register and execute additional code (function) before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The observability API allows you to register and execute additional code (function) before
```

and after original one without introducing additional performance penalties in
other areas, so in other words, we pay only for what we use and only for altered
function. Before PHP 8, the most common technique for adding tracing
capabilities was altering `zend_execute_ex` function (a monkey patching kind
technique), however this could lead to stack overflow and performance problems
as whole application paid for that. There were also considered other approaches

> like compile time AST modifications which seems feasible, howerer there are no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
like compile time AST modifications which seems feasible, however there are no
```

> known production ready tracers that works in this way up to date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
known production ready tracers that work in this way at this time.
```

## Observability API from auto-instrumentation perspective

> At the moment of this writing, observability API is used by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, the observability API is used by
```

[c extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)

> and exposes one function with following interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and exposes one function with the following interface:
```

> and exposes one function with following interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and exposes one function with the following interface:
```

```php
function hook(
    ?string $class,
    string $function,
    ?\Closure $pre = null,
    ?\Closure $post = null,
): bool {}
```

This function can be used from user application in order to add additional

> functionality executed before and after. Below code snippet shows how to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functionality executed before and after the observed function. The below code snippet shows how to
```

instrument dummy `helloworld` function:

```php

function helloWorld() {
  echo 'helloWorld';
}

\OpenTelemetry\Instrumentation\hook(null, 'helloWorld',
    static function (?string $class, array $params, ?string $classname, string $functionname, ?string $filename, ?int $lineno)
    {
      echo 'before';
    },
    static function (mixed $object, array $params, mixed $return, ?Throwable $exception)
    {
      echo 'after';
    }
);
```

> In the same way, we implemented tracing support for the most important

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the same way, we have implemented tracing support for some of the most important
```

`interfaces/libraries/frameworks` that are parts of
[Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-contrib/tree/main/src/Instrumentation)
repo. Each `auto-instrumentation` package uses above `hook` function in order to
register and provide tracing functionality. One missing thing, not mentioned yet
is an `API and SDK` used to create traces and other necessary components. This

> is content and responisibility of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is the responsibility of the opentelemetry-php
```

[main](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php) repo which is

> foundation for everything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the core implementation of opentelemetry for PHP.
```

![php-rel](php-rel.png)

## How to use it

All components necessary for auto-instrumentation can be installed manually,

> however we invested time to lower the barier and created an installer that can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
however we invested time to lower the barrier to entry and have created an installer that can
```

> do that for you. This section will show how auto-instrument simple php `laravel`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do that for you. This section will show how auto-instrument a simple php `laravel`
```

application created from scratch.

First step is to create a demo application
[more info](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation).

```
composer create-project laravel/laravel example-app
```

Next, we have to install
[opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer](https://packagist.org/packages/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer).

```
cd example-app
composer require open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer
```

Opentelemetry instrumentation installer works in two modes:

- basic (installs everything with most recent version)
- advanced (gives control to the user)

After installation we have to run `install-otel-instrumentation` with either
`basic` or `advanced` switch as below.

```
./vendor/bin/install-otel-instrumentation basic
```

> and last step is to run your application by another tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final step is to run your application via another tool,
```

> `run-with-otel-instrumentation` that ask you for few settings and finally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`run-with-otel-instrumentation` that prompts you for a few settings and then
```

> execute passed command `php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php` in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
executes the provided command, `php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php` in
```

this case.

**NOTE** Everything that `run-with-otel-instrumentation` is doing can be done by
hand by setting needed environment variables and running application as usual.

> It was created for convenienence for rapidly testing application and preventing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was created for convenience for rapidly testing out open-telemetry against an application and providing
```

> situation when user might miss something.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
working default configuration.
```

```
./vendor/bin/run-with-otel-instrumentation php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php
```

Now, as a result of triggering request to `http://localhost:8080` you should see
following result in
[jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.42/getting-started/)

![laravel-auto](laravel-auto.png)

## Current status and next steps

We have all necessary components in place:

- APIs and SDK as a foundation and implementation of opentelemetry
  specification.
- C extension as a foundation for auto-instrumentation.
- Auto Instrumentation support (WIP) for most important and popular libraries
  and frameworks.

> - Development tools that can help lower barier for users and developers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Development tools that can help lower barrier for users and developers
```

  interested in instrumenting arbitrary code.

One of our goals is to increase awareness of this work and involve more people
that will help us improve it, extend coverage and fix bugs.

> Try it and give us feedback. In case of any problem open

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please try it out and give us feedback. If you encounter any problems, you can open an
```

---
title: Opentelemetry PHP Auto-Instrumentation
linkTitle: PHP Auto-Instrumentation
date: 2023-03-15
author: '[Przemek Delewski](https://github.com/pdelewski/) (Sumo Logic)'
---

## Introduction

Automatic Instrumentation is a process of adding tracing capabilities into user
application without modyfing it's source code. There are several techniques to
do that, but all of them more or less work in the same way by injecting
additional code into original one during compile time, link time, run-time or by
extending the operating system in case of [ebpf](https://ebpf.io/). This

> blogpost presents method used by Opentelemetry PHP auto-instrumentation.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Add a link to the auto instrumentation repo?

Author: @svrnm  Term "Opentelemetry PHP auto-instrumentation" here is used as an umbrella for whole auto-instrumentation work and at least for 2 repos, so I would leave it as it is if you don't mind.

Reviewer 2: ACK

## Preconditions

Due to the technique chosen by the opentelemetry-php community for
auto-instrumentation purposes, there are a few preconditions that must be
fulfilled before user can use it in their application. PHP auto-instrumentation
is based on observability API that was introduced in PHP 8.0. This means that
user has to have at least PHP 8 installed. Another important component is the
[composer](https://getcomposer.org/download/) package manager in most recent
version. Third, is availability of c compiler in order to build
[c extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)
which is core component used for injecting tracing code.

## Background

> Observability API allows register and execute additional code (function) before

Reviewer 2: is there a link to that Observability API?

Author: Updated

    {
      echo 'before';
    },
    static function (mixed $object, array $params, mixed $return, ?Throwable $exception)
    {
      echo 'after';
    }
);
```

In the same way, we implemented tracing support for the most important
`interfaces/libraries/frameworks` that are parts of
[Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-contrib/tree/main/src/Instrumentation)
repo. Each `auto-instrumentation` package uses above `hook` function in order to
register and provide tracing functionality. One missing thing, not mentioned yet
is an `API and SDK` used to create traces and other necessary components. This
is content and responisibility of
[main](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php) repo which is
foundation for everything.

![php-rel](php-rel.png)

## How to use it

All components necessary for auto-instrumentation can be installed manually,
however we invested time to lower the barier and created an installer that can
do that for you. This section will show how auto-instrument simple php `laravel`
application created from scratch.

> First step is to create a demo application
> [more info](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First step is to create a demo application. Here we use the popular [laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation). framework:

```

./vendor/bin/install-otel-instrumentation basic
```

and last step is to run your application by another tool
`run-with-otel-instrumentation` that ask you for few settings and finally
executes the provided command,
`php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php` in this case.

**NOTE** Everything that `run-with-otel-instrumentation` is doing can be done by
hand by setting needed environment variables and running application as usual.
It was created for convenience for rapidly testing out open-telemetry against an
application and providing working default configuration.

```
./vendor/bin/run-with-otel-instrumentation php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php
```

Now, as a result of triggering request to `http://localhost:8080` you should see
following result in
[jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.42/getting-started/)

![laravel-auto](laravel-auto.png)

## Current status and next steps

We have all necessary components in place:

- APIs and SDK as a foundation and implementation of opentelemetry
  specification.
- C extension as a foundation for auto-instrumentation.
- Auto Instrumentation support (WIP) for most important and popular libraries
  and frameworks.

> - Development tools that can help lower barrier for users and developers
>   interested in instrumenting arbitrary code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Development tools that can help lower barrier for users and developers
  interested in instrumenting arbitrary code.
- [Documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/php/automatic/)
```

---
title: Opentelemetry PHP Auto-Instrumentation
linkTitle: PHP Auto-Instrumentation

> date: 2023-03-15

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-03-21
```

author: '[Przemek Delewski](https://github.com/pdelewski/) (Sumo Logic)'
---

Automatic Instrumentation is a process of adding tracing capabilities into user

> application without modyfing it's source code. There are several techniques to

Author: thx

that, but all of them more or less work in the same way by injecting additional
code into original one during compile time, link time, run-time or by extending
the operating system in case of [ebpf](https://ebpf.io/). This blogpost presents
method used by Opentelemetry PHP auto-instrumentation.

## Prerequisites

To use the
[PHP auto-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation),
you'll need three things:

> - PHP 8.0 or higher. The PH auto-instrumentation used the Observability API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PHP 8.0 or higher. The PHP auto-instrumentation uses the Observability API
```

> ## Preconditions
> 
> Due to the technique chosen by the opentelemetry-php community for
> auto-instrumentation purposes, there are a few preconditions that must be
> fulfilled before user can use it in their application. PHP auto-instrumentation
> is based on observability API that was introduced in PHP 8.0. This means that
> user has to have at least PHP 8 installed. Another important component is the
> [composer](https://getcomposer.org/download/) package manager in most recent
> version. Third, is availability of c compiler in order to build
> [c extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)
> which is core component used for injecting tracing code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites

To use the [PHP auto-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation), you'll need three things:

- PHP 8.0 or higher. The PH auto-instrumentation used the Observability
API introduced in PHP 8.0.
- [Composer]((https://getcomposer.org/download/)
- A C Compiler must be available on your machine
```

I felt like this part needed a rewrite. Ideally we can take content from this blog and turn it into docs when things stabilize a little more. Shaping it a little more like docs for instructional stuff (not commentary) helps with that a bunch.

> ## Background
> 
> [Observability API](https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/php-8-observability-baked-right-in/)
> allows register and execute additional code (function) before and after original
> one without introducing additional performance penalties in other areas, so in
> other words, we pay only for what we use and only for altered function. Before
> PHP 8, the most common technique for adding tracing capabilities was altering
> `zend_execute_ex` function (a monkey patching kind technique), however this
> could lead to stack overflow and performance problems as whole application paid
> for that. There were also considered other approaches like compile time AST
> modifications which seems feasible, howerer there are no known production ready
> tracers that works in this way up to date.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Background on the PHP 8.0 Observability API

[Observability API](https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/engineering/php-8-observability-baked-right-in/)
allows you to register and execute additional code (function) before and after an original
one without introducing additional performance penalties in other areas. Before
PHP 8.0, the most common technique for adding tracing capabilities was altering
the `zend_execute_ex` function (a monkey patching kind technique). However, the
use of monkey patching can lead to performance problems, stack overflows at runtime,
and a general application overhead that may not be desirable. Another approach we considered
was plugging into the AST and modifying compiled code, but there were no known-good way
to do this that was production ready.
```

Author: @cartermp  Last sentence changes meaning IMO. I changed a bit what you suggested.

> ## Observability API from auto-instrumentation perspective

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Observability API from auto-instrumentation perspective
```

    {
      echo 'before';
    },
    static function (mixed $object, array $params, mixed $return, ?Throwable $exception)
    {
      echo 'after';
    }
);
```

In the same way, we have implemented tracing support for some of the most
important `interfaces/libraries/frameworks` that are parts of
[Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-contrib/tree/main/src/Instrumentation)
repo. Each `auto-instrumentation` package uses above `hook` function in order to
register and provide tracing functionality. One missing thing, not mentioned yet
is an `API and SDK` used to create traces and other necessary components. This
is the responsibility of the opentelemetry-php
[main](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php) repo which is
foundation for everything.

![php-rel](php-rel.png)

## How to use it

All components necessary for auto-instrumentation can be installed manually,
however we invested time to lower the barrier to entry and have created an
installer that can do that for you. This section will show how auto-instrument a
simple php `laravel` application created from scratch.

> First step is to create a demo application. Here we use the popular

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first step is to create a demo application. You can use the popular
```

Author: hmm, that changes meaning. In the example we use `laravel` framework

[laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation) framework:

```sh
composer create-project laravel/laravel example-app
```

> Next, we have to install

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, install
```

[opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer](https://packagist.org/packages/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer).

```sh
cd example-app
composer require open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer
```

Opentelemetry instrumentation installer works in two modes:

- basic (installs everything with most recent version)
- advanced (gives control to the user)

> After installation we have to run `install-otel-instrumentation` with either

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After installation, run `install-otel-instrumentation` with either
```

Author: ok

`basic` or `advanced` switch as below.

```sh
./vendor/bin/install-otel-instrumentation basic
```

> The final step is to run your application via another tool,
> `run-with-otel-instrumentation` that prompts you for a few settings and then
> executes the provided command,
> `php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php` in this case.
> 
> **NOTE** Everything that `run-with-otel-instrumentation` is doing can be done by
> hand by setting needed environment variables and running application as usual.
> It was created for convenience for rapidly testing out open-telemetry against an
> application and providing working default configuration.
> 
> ```sh
> ./vendor/bin/run-with-otel-instrumentation php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The final step is to run your application with
`run-with-otel-instrumentation`:

```sh
./vendor/bin/run-with-otel-instrumentation php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php
```

The`run-with-otel-instrumentation` isn't magic: everything it does can be done by
hand by setting environment variables and running your application normally.
It is a convenience tool for rapidly testing out open-telemetry against an
application with a working default configuration.
```

---
title: Opentelemetry PHP Auto-Instrumentation
linkTitle: PHP Auto-Instrumentation
date: 2023-03-15
author: '[Przemek Delewski](https://github.com/pdelewski/) (Sumo Logic)'
---

> 
> ## Introduction

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

`interfaces/libraries/frameworks` that are parts of
[Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-contrib/tree/main/src/Instrumentation)
repo. Each `auto-instrumentation` package uses above `hook` function in order to
register and provide tracing functionality. One missing thing, not mentioned yet
is an `API and SDK` used to create traces and other necessary components. This
is content and responisibility of
[main](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php) repo which is
foundation for everything.

![php-rel](php-rel.png)

## How to use it

All components necessary for auto-instrumentation can be installed manually,
however we invested time to lower the barier and created an installer that can
do that for you. This section will show how auto-instrument simple php `laravel`
application created from scratch.

First step is to create a demo application. Here we use the popular
[laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation) framework:

```sh
composer create-project laravel/laravel example-app
```

Next, we have to install
[opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer](https://packagist.org/packages/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer).

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```sh
```

cd example-app
composer require open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer
```

Opentelemetry instrumentation installer works in two modes:

- basic (installs everything with most recent version)
- advanced (gives control to the user)

After installation we have to run `install-otel-instrumentation` with either
`basic` or `advanced` switch as below.

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```sh
```

./vendor/bin/install-otel-instrumentation basic
```

and last step is to run your application by another tool
`run-with-otel-instrumentation` that ask you for few settings and finally
executes the provided command,
`php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php` in this case.

**NOTE** Everything that `run-with-otel-instrumentation` is doing can be done by
hand by setting needed environment variables and running application as usual.
It was created for convenience for rapidly testing out open-telemetry against an
application and providing working default configuration.

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```sh
```

other words, we pay only for what we use and only for altered function. Before
PHP 8, the most common technique for adding tracing capabilities was altering
`zend_execute_ex` function (a monkey patching kind technique), however this
could lead to stack overflow and performance problems as whole application paid
for that. There were also considered other approaches like compile time AST
modifications which seems feasible, howerer there are no known production ready
tracers that works in this way up to date.

## Observability API from auto-instrumentation perspective

At the moment of this writing,
[observability API](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-8.0/Zend/zend_observer.h)
is used by
[c extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation)
and exposes one function with following interface:

```php
function hook(
    ?string $class,
    string $function,
    ?\Closure $pre = null,
    ?\Closure $post = null,
): bool {}
```

This function can be used from user application in order to add additional
functionality executed before and after. Below code snippet shows how to
instrument dummy `helloworld` function:

```php

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

    {
      echo 'before';
    },
    static function (mixed $object, array $params, mixed $return, ?Throwable $exception)
    {
      echo 'after';
    }
);
```

In the same way, we implemented tracing support for the most important
`interfaces/libraries/frameworks` that are parts of
[Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-contrib/tree/main/src/Instrumentation)
repo. Each `auto-instrumentation` package uses above `hook` function in order to
register and provide tracing functionality. One missing thing, not mentioned yet
is an `API and SDK` used to create traces and other necessary components. This
is content and responisibility of
[main](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php) repo which is
foundation for everything.

![php-rel](php-rel.png)

## How to use it

All components necessary for auto-instrumentation can be installed manually,
however we invested time to lower the barier and created an installer that can
do that for you. This section will show how auto-instrument simple php `laravel`
application created from scratch.

First step is to create a demo application. Here we use the popular

> [laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation). framework:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[laravel](https://laravel.com/docs/10.x/installation) framework:
```

> ```

Reviewer 4: Add the `sh` language to all command-line code blocks in this page, like this:

```suggestion
```sh
```

[opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer](https://packagist.org/packages/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer).

```
cd example-app
composer require open-telemetry/opentelemetry-instrumentation-installer
```

Opentelemetry instrumentation installer works in two modes:

- basic (installs everything with most recent version)
- advanced (gives control to the user)

After installation we have to run `install-otel-instrumentation` with either
`basic` or `advanced` switch as below.

```
./vendor/bin/install-otel-instrumentation basic
```

and last step is to run your application by another tool
`run-with-otel-instrumentation` that ask you for few settings and finally
executes the provided command,
`php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php` in this case.

**NOTE** Everything that `run-with-otel-instrumentation` is doing can be done by
hand by setting needed environment variables and running application as usual.
It was created for convenience for rapidly testing out open-telemetry against an
application and providing working default configuration.

```
./vendor/bin/run-with-otel-instrumentation php -S localhost:8080 -t public public/index.php
```

> Now, as a result of triggering request to `http://localhost:8080` you should see

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, as a result of triggering request to <http://localhost:8080> you should see
```

following result in

> [jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.42/getting-started/)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.42/getting-started/)
```
